Add Release.md (#5622)
gfx-rs/wgpu: RELEASE.md

> This is an overview of how to run wgpu releases.

Reviewer: style: backticks plz

suggestion: I'd like to distinguish `wgpu`-the-crate from `wgpu`-the-Git-repository.

```suggestion
This is an overview of how to run releases in the `wgpu` repository.
```

## Structure

> We do a major breaking release every 12 weeks. This happens no matter the status of various in-flight projects.

Reviewer: thought: …unless we have a reason to postpone, like last time? 😈

I think there are _some_ conditions under which a release is postponed, but noting that they are only under emergent conditions sounds…maybe redundant? 🤷🏻‍♂️

> We do a patch releases as needed in the weeks between major releases. Once a new major release is cut, we stop doing patch releases for the previous major release unless there is a critical bug or a compilation issue.

Reviewer: thought: This seems particularly important for users to understand. Not sure if there's anything actionable here, but this was a nice bit of clarity to have.

## People

Anyone can perform most of these steps, except actually publishing the crates.

> Currently only @kvark and @cwfitzgerald can publish all crates. @grovesNL can also publish `wgpu` crates. @jimblandy can publish `naga` crates. @msiglreith can publish `d3d12`.

Reviewer: question(non-blocking): The "bus factor" seems low; we don't seem to have room for contingency for cutting releases (i.e., in the scenario you (@cwfitzgerald) suddenly disappear from the project). Is there a current plan to increase access to this?

I can reasonably see folks disagreeing with this perception, so I'll prompt @gfx-rs/wgpu and @gfx-rs/naga here, too.

Reviewer 2: I always wondered about this bit a lil. I kinda assumed that @jimblandy can also push releases so my mind was at ease but now I'm alarmed. Seems risky!
(too many goes into the other direction of too risky ofc, don't think all of the maintainers should have the publish keys, that's just asking for trouble)

Reviewer: Added to the [2024-05-08 agenda](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1I3qh1kShDu48VehgFarftEpbEqZK8e8kWqaDo05e1jM/edit#heading=h.g59hvbci1gm1).

> Anyone can perform most of these steps, except actually publishing the crates.
> 
> Currently only @kvark and @cwfitzgerald can publish all crates. @grovesNL can also publish `wgpu` crates. @jimblandy can publish `naga` crates. @msiglreith can publish `d3d12`.

Reviewer: suggestion: It seems odd to separate these into two paragraphs. 

nitpick: Comma after `Currently`.

Combined feedback:

```suggestion
Anyone can perform most of these steps, except actually publishing the crates. Currently, only @kvark and @cwfitzgerald can publish all crates. @grovesNL can also publish `wgpu` crates. @jimblandy can publish `naga` crates. @msiglreith can publish `d3d12`.
```

Reviewer: thought: This might be better constructed as a list or table, instead?

## Major Release Process

> Approx 1 Week Before:

Reviewer: question: These seem like poor man's section headers. Why not formally make a section instead, i.e.:

```suggestion
### Approx. 1 Week Before

```

…?

This feedback also applies to other headers like it.

> - Determine if `glow` (@groves), `metal-rs` (@kvark and @cwfitzgerald) or any other dependant crates will need a release. If so, coordinate with their maintainers.

Reviewer: question: Is there more specific direction we can give here? The only criteria I can think of is "make sure we're depending on published crates on Crates.io, rather than, say, `git` dependencies".

> - Determine if `glow` (@groves), `metal-rs` (@kvark and @cwfitzgerald) or any other dependant crates will need a release. If so, coordinate with their maintainers.

Reviewer: nitpick/typo: s/dependant/dependent in US English, though this is valid for British English.

suggestion: Note that we're talking about out-of-tree dependencies.

Combined feedback:

```suggestion
- Determine if `glow` (@groves), `metal-rs` (@kvark and @cwfitzgerald) or any other dependent crates outside of the repo will need a release. If so, coordinate with their maintainers.
```

> - Determine if `glow` (@groves), `metal-rs` (@kvark and @cwfitzgerald) or any other dependant crates will need a release. If so, coordinate with their maintainers.

Reviewer: suggestion(non-blocking): I think it'd be nicer to have the directive be simpler with more supporting information/points of contact for individual repos as a sub-list:

```suggestion
- Determine if dependent crates will need a release. If so, coordinate with their maintainers. Known points of contact:
  - `glow` (@groves)
  - `metal-rs` (@kvark and @cwfitzgerald)
```

> - Go through the changelog:

Reviewer: suggestion: "the changelog" is less concrete than "the `CHANGELOG.md` file" (though less verbose. I think including the actual file location in this guide is important, so I think we should do 1 of 2 things:

1. Define what "the changelog" means somewhere earlier.
2. Replace all instances of "the changelog" with "the `CHANGELOG.md` file".

I'd vote for (1), but (2) also seems reasonable.

>   - Re-categorize miscategorized items

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Re-categorize miscategorized items.
```

  - Edit major changes so a user can easily understand what they need to do.
  - Add missing major changes that users need to know about.
  - Copy-edit the changelog for clarity.

Day of Release:

> - Update all crates to be the new version. We bump all versions even if there were no changes.

Reviewer: suggestion: I strongly recommend that this and other lists be ordered, since this is fundamentally an ordered sequence of steps to execute. Just having numbers can help a reader mentally keep track of what they're doing while reading, which is important for something load-bearing like this process.

  - `d3d12`
  - `naga`
  - `naga-cli`
  - `wgpu-types`
  - `wgpu-hal`
  - `wgpu-core`
  - `Cargo.toml` (this covers the rest of the crates).

> - Ensure `glow` and `metal` are updated to the latest version if needed.

Reviewer: question(non-blocking): I feel like it's risky to have dependency changes _the day of_ a release; most people consuming mainline will have been testing with the previous versions, and won't have a chance to catch issues. Could we at least move this to be approximately a week before?

Author: This is supposed to be "move from git to crates with no/minimal code changes, as you just got them to publish a release".

> - Add a new header for the changelog with the release version and date.

Reviewer: suggestion: Add a concrete example from the `CHANGELOG`.

```suggestion
- Add a new `## Header` for the changelog with the release version and date (i.e., `## v0.20.0 (2024-04-28)`).
```

- Create a PR with all of the version changes and changelog updates.

> - Once the PR is CI clean, (force) merge it.

Reviewer: question: What does `(force)` mean in this case?

Reviewer: Ah, I understand now. Suggested edit:

```suggestion
- Once the PR is CI clean, forcefully `Enable auto-merge (rebase)` it without waiting for approval using the `Merge without waiting for requirements to be met (bypass branch protections)` checkbox.
```

- Checkout `trunk` with the merged PR.
- Publish! These commands can be pasted directly into your terminal in a single command, and they will publish everything.
  ```bash
    cargo publish -p d3d12
    cargo publish -p naga
    cargo publish -p naga-cli
    cargo publish -p wgpu-types
    cargo publish -p wgpu-hal --all-features

>     cargo publish -p wgpu-core --all-features

Reviewer: nitpick: Why is `--all-features` here? I'm pretty sure we can remove it. I don't think it actually changes the `publish` process, but is accepted across all `cargo` invocations Just Because™.

Author: Because core and hal need _some_ backends enabled, otherwise it will be unhappy. `--all-features` is the easiest way to get there.

    cargo publish -p wgpu
    cargo publish -p wgpu-info

>   ```

Reviewer: - [ ] issue: I can see this crate list becoming out-of-date. I'd strongly prefer this not be the case, and that we use instead members of the main crate workspace whose `Cargo.toml` does not contain `package.publish = false` as our source of truth.

question(non-blocking): Have we considered consolidating these (and a few other) steps with a tool like `cargo-release`?

I actually have greatly enjoyed `cargo-release` in my own FOSS efforts, and I think it can automate a few steps of the process as it's written (and also tackle the `issue` I mention above). @gfx-rs/wgpu, @gfx-rs/naga: Shall we discuss this in our next `wgpu maintainers` meeting?

Reviewer: Added to the [2024-05-08 agenda](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1I3qh1kShDu48VehgFarftEpbEqZK8e8kWqaDo05e1jM/edit#heading=h.g59hvbci1gm1).

> - Create a new release on the `wgpu` repo with the changelog and a tag called `vX.Y.Z`.

Reviewer: suggestion: Continue with a concrete example here.

Combined feedback:

```suggestion
- Create a new release on the `wgpu` repo with the changelog and a tag called `vX.Y.Z` (i.e., `v0.20.0`).
```

> - Create a branch with the with the new version `vX.Y` and push it to the repo.

Reviewer: typo: s/with the with the/with the/ (though I'd prefer "called", to be consistent with the previous step).

suggestion: Continue with a concrete example here.

Combined feedback:

```suggestion
- Create a branch called `vX.Y` (i.e., `v0.20`) and push it to the repo.
```

> - Publish the link to the github release in the following places.

Reviewer: typo: Proper capitalization of `GitHub`, as with other places in this doc.

typo: A colon is preferred for serializing lists to English.

suggestion: Continue with a concrete example.

Combined feedback:

```suggestion
- Publish the link to the GitHub release (i.e., <https://github.com/gfx-rs/wgpu/releases/tag/v0.20.0>) in the following places:
```

>   - [r/rust](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/).

Reviewer: thought: I see no direction regarding the title, but maybe we don't need it?

>     - Add an AMA comment.

Reviewer: suggestion: Help folks who don't know what an AMA is to understand the term.

suggestion: Rust communities tend to value having sufficient context about the post's subject in comments, so new readers aren't lost. I think we'll mesh better with those communities if we also include something like the repo's description in the proposed AMA comment:

Combined feedback:

```suggestion
    - Add a comment to the post including:
      - Some context about what WGPU is. It is recommended to use the repo's current description.
      - An [Ask Me Anything](https://support.reddithelp.com/hc/en-us/articles/15484156913940-What-is-an-AMA-and-why-would-I-host-one) prompt.
      - Anything else from the release that you may want to highlight.
```

Once accepted, it also seems helpful to update the next `Add an AMA comment.` to instead be `Add a comment like in the steps for the previous post.`

>   - Crosspost to [r/rust_gamedev](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust_gamedev/).

Reviewer: suggestion: Explain what crossposting is.

suggestion: Use a demonstrative for hopefully clearer language.

```suggestion
  - [Crosspost](https://support.reddithelp.com/hc/en-us/articles/4835584113684-What-is-Crossposting) the previous post to [r/rust_gamedev](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust_gamedev/).
```

    - Add an AMA comment.

>   - Include the r/rust post shortlink in the following posts as well:
>   - [wgpu matrix](https://matrix.to/#/#wgpu:matrix.org)
>   - [Rust Gamedev Discord](https://discord.gg/yNtPTb2) in the #crates channel
>   - [Bevy Discord](https://discord.com/invite/bevy) in the #rendering-dev channel
>   - [Graphics Programming Discord](https://discord.gg/6mgNGk7) in the #webgpu channel
>   - [Rust Community Discord](https://discord.gg/rust-lang-community) in the #games-and-graphics channel

Reviewer: typo: Need to indent to create a proper sub-list.

typo: Capitalization for `wgpu matrix` could be better, esp. to match other entries.

Combined feedback:

```suggestion
  - Include the r/rust post shortlink in the following posts as well:
    - [WGPU Matrix](https://matrix.to/#/#wgpu:matrix.org)
    - [Rust Gamedev Discord](https://discord.gg/yNtPTb2) in the #crates channel
    - [Bevy Discord](https://discord.com/invite/bevy) in the #rendering-dev channel
    - [Graphics Programming Discord](https://discord.gg/6mgNGk7) in the #webgpu channel
    - [Rust Community Discord](https://discord.gg/rust-lang-community) in the #games-and-graphics channel
```

- Complete the release's milestone on GitHub.

> - Create a new milestone for the next release, in 12 weeks time.

Reviewer: typo: s/weeks/weeks'/

typo: A comma actually _doesn't_ seem appropriate here, unless…

…suggestion: s/in 12 weeks' time/with due date set to 12 weeks from release/.

suggestion: Continue with the concrete example of 0.20.0.

```suggestion
- Create a new milestone for the next release, with due date set to 12 weeks from this release's date (i.e., 0.20.0 released on 2024-04-28, so the next milestone `0.21.0` would be due on 2024-07-17).
```

> ## Patch Release Process

Reviewer: nitpick: Most MD formatters (and other MD documents in the ) place spaces between the header and content.

```suggestion
## Patch Release Process

```

This feedback also applies to other headers in this document.

> - Enumerate all PRs that haven't been backproted yet. These use the `needs-backport` label. [GH Link](https://github.com/gfx-rs/wgpu/issues?q=label%3A%22PR%3A+needs+back-porting)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Enumerate all PRs that haven't been backported yet. These use the `needs-backport` label. [GH Link](https://github.com/gfx-rs/wgpu/issues?q=label%3A%22PR%3A+needs+back-porting)
```

> - Enumerate all PRs that haven't been backported yet. These use the `needs-backport` label. [GH Link](https://github.com/gfx-rs/wgpu/issues?q=label%3A%22PR%3A+needs+back-porting)

Reviewer: nitpick(non-blocking): IDK, I think the "natural" way of linking works is nicer-looking:

```suggestion
- Enumerate all PRs that haven't been backported yet. These use the [`needs-backport` label](https://github.com/gfx-rs/wgpu/issues?q=label%3A%22PR%3A+needs+back-porting).
```

> - On _your own branch_ based on the latest release branch. Cherry-pick the PRs that need to be backported. When modifying the commits, use --append to retain their original authorship.

Reviewer: typo: A comma should separate these otherwise incomplete sentences, not a period.

style: Backticks around CLI args., please!

issue: It's unclear what CLI you're actually talking about. `--append` doesn't exist in the `git-cherry-pick` or `git-commit` CLIs. I suspect you meant the `git commit --amend` flag? 🤔

Combined feedback:

```suggestion
- On _your own branch_ based on the latest release branch, cherry-pick the PRs that need to be backported. When modifying the commits, use `--amend` to retain their original authorship.
```

Author: Yes, I use a git gui so I click the button that starts with an `a` :)

- Remove the `needs-backport` label from the PRs.

> - Fix the changelogs items and add a new header for the patch release with the release version and date.

Reviewer: typo: s/changelogs/changelog's/

typo: Comma between phrases, i.e., `…items, and…`.

Suggestion: Continue with the concrete example (i.e., 0.20.1).

```suggestion
- Fix the changelog's items, and add a new header for the patch release with the release version and date (i.e., `## 0.20.1 (2024-05-03)`).
```

> - Once all the PRs are cherry-picked, look at the diff between HEAD and the previous patch release. See what crates changed.

Reviewer: style: Backticks for refs., please!

suggestion: An example CLI invocation might be nice here.

```suggestion
- Once all the PRs are cherry-picked, look at the diff between `HEAD` and the previous patch release (i.e., via `git diff v0.20.0..HEAD`). See what crates changed.
```

- Bump all the versions of the crates that changed.

> - Create a PR with all of the version changes and changelog updates into the release branch..

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Create a PR with all of the version changes and changelog updates into the release branch.
```
